good afternoon thank you for joining us
i'm very glad also to be joined by
june rain of the mhra and chris witte
our road map to freedom depends on the
continued success of our vaccination
program
and so it's reasonable for people to
want to be continually
reassured not only that our vaccines are
safe
and effective but also that we have the
supply
that we need so i want to address both
points
today especially in the light of
concerns you
may have heard in some other countries
about the oxford
astrazeneca vaccine first
the independent medicines and healthcare
products regulatory agency
has reviewed the evidence as it does
every week
they've confirmed that the benefits of
the vaccine in preventing covid
far outweigh any risks and people
should continue to get their vaccine
when asked to do so and
june will say a little bit more about
that in a moment
it's also very important for our
european friends that today the european
medicines agency
has come to a clear scientific
conclusion and i quote
this is a safe and effective vaccine
we also saw yesterday the evidence from
public health england
that a single dose of either vaccine
provides
60 protection against getting covered
and reduces the chances of
hospitalization
by 80 percent and the risk of death by
85 percent
so the oxford jab is safe and the pfizer
jab is safe
the thing that isn't safe is catching
kovid which is why
it's so important that we all get our
jabs as soon as our turn
comes and as it happens i'm getting mine
tomorrow and the center
where i'm getting jabbed is currently
using the oxford astrazeneca vaccine
for those receiving their first dose and
that is the one
i'll be having and let me also assure
you
if you come forwards after receiving
your letter we have the jabs
for you we've always said that in a
vaccination
program of this pace and this scale
some interruptions in supply are
inevitable
and it is true that in the short term
we're receiving
fewer vaccines than we had planned for a
week ago
that is because of a delay in a shipment
from the serum
institute who are doing a herculean job
in producing vaccines in such large
quantities
and because of a batch that we currently
have in the uk
that needs to be retested as part of our
rigorous safety program so
as a result we will receive slightly
fewer
vaccines in april than in march but that
is still more
than we received in february and the
supply
we do have will still enable us to hit
the targets
we have set that means that by the 15th
of april we'll be able to offer a first
dose to all of you who are over 50
as well as those under 50 who are
clinically
vulnerable we will have the second doses
that people need
within the 12-week window which means
around
12 million people in april and
we will still offer a first dose to
every adult
by the end of july so there is no
change to the next steps of
the roadmap we've now vaccinated over 25
million people across
our entire united kingdom more than the
entire population
of many countries and our progress along
the road to freedom
continues unchecked we remain on track
to reclaim the things we love to see our
families
and friends again to return to our local
pubs our gyms
and sports facilities and of course
our shops all of course as long as the
data continue to go in the right
direction and
we meet our four tests and
the way to ensure that this happens is
to
get that jab when your turn comes so
let's get the jab done thank you very
much i'm not going to hand
to june thank you prime minister and
good afternoon
the mhra has been carrying out robust
safety vigilance in tandem with the
covid 19 vaccination programme
our role is to continually monitor
safety
during widespread use of a vaccine to
confirm that they're performing as
expected
to identify any new side effects that
arise
and to ensure that the benefits continue
to outweigh the risks
we've been able to gather a large amount
of data
on the safety profile of the available
vaccines
and have done a rigorous scientific
review of
all the available data with regards to
suspected
blood clots our review alongside the
critical assessment of leading
independent scientists
in the commission on human medicines
shows that there is
no difference that blood clots in veins
are occurring
more than would be expected in the
absence of vaccination
for either vaccine the public can have
every confidence in the thoroughness of
our review
we have also received five reports of a
different
a rare form of blood clot in the
cerebral
sinuses cerebral sinus vein thrombosis
or csvt occurring together with lowered
blood platelets
shortly after vaccination with the
covid19 vaccine astrazeneca
this type of blood clot can rarely occur
naturally
in unvaccinated people as well as in
people
with covid 19 disease a further review
of these events is ongoing
but a causal relationship with the
vaccine
has not yet been established and the
rate of occurrence of these csvt events
among the 11 million people vaccinated
is extremely rare while we continue to
investigate these cases
as a precautionary measure we would
advise anyone with a headache that lasts
more than four days after vaccination
or bruising beyond the site of
vaccination after a few days
to seek medical attention and we will
communicate
further on the outcome of this further
review when it's complete
the mhra assessed this data alongside
the benefits
of the vaccine in preventing covid19
with its associated risk of
hospitalization
and death and determined that the
benefits
firmly remain to outweigh the risks
so you should continue to receive your
vaccine when you get the call or the
second dose
as soon as you're contacted and i want
to end by expressing our sincere
gratitude
to those who have sent reports to the
mhra
and remind everyone that you can report
and you should report
all suspected side effects to covet 19
vaccines
through the coronavirus yellow card
scheme
thank you prime minister thank you very
much
june uh let's go to chris you anything
to add to that thank you very much let's
go to let's go to jane from
buckinghamshire
good afternoon are the uk able to
provide stats
to prove that the astrazeneca vaccine is
safe and therefore alleviate the current
fears of blood clots
in the eu thank you thanks jane i'm i'm
going to pass that straight back to
to to june minto to chris yes we can
we're committed
to transparency we publish every week
all the suspected adverse drug reaction
reports that we receive
and our report includes further
information on any trends
and it will certainly communicate all
the data and the stats
around the particular issue of blood
clots
thank you i mean the thing i'd
add to what dr raines just said
is firstly that all of medicine is about
saying look what are the
potential risks of the treatment and
everything that you take
every drug every vaccine every operation
has going to have to have some
risks often very small including drugs
that people are very used to like
aspirin so for example that can cause
uh clotting sorry bleeding that can
cause a whole variety of problems
and yet we all would see that as a
normal uh drug that people would just
have in their
uh their bathroom cabinet so all drugs
have some
side effects that are rare the question
is are the benefits big enough to
justify that
and what we have here what dr rayne has
laid out is an incredibly
small potential risk and even this is a
potential risk not one that is
certain so five people out of the 11
million that have been given the vaccine
in the uk so far
against the really very substantial
protection that these vaccines given
that the az vaccine as well as the fisa
vaccine give
to people against this really common
disease
and i think it's important to remind
people that at this point in time
uh we're still in a situation where the
uh the uh the office for national
statistics
i think that one in 270 people
have got covet this is still a common
disease and it is a very
dangerous disease for many people people
dying
people getting significant blood
clotting problems that's one of the
risks of covid
uh people having long term physical and
mental effects from covid
so this is a very significant disease
that is very common
with a very effective vaccine and two
vaccines in the case of
az and pfizer and real uh
issues that we always have to think
about with all drugs but they are so
much smaller
than the benefits of getting the vaccine
so the risk benefit is really strongly
in favor of getting vaccine vaccinated
as
mhra have said today and as the ema
the excellent uh european medicine
safety agency has also said today so
this is a universal view
it's also the view of the world health
organization wha
thanks chris uh barry from birthmontren
asks in the light of the european
president uh
the european commission president
threatening to block the export of
vaccines
how will this affect the general public
who are waiting for the second dose of
the fisa vaccine which is
which is produced in in belgium uh well
uh barry thank you very much uh i think
that
people should be uh under uh no
of uh anxiety or no misapprehensions
about that we will get a
get on and deliver all the the second
doses of the
of the pfizer and um
it's very important to stress whatever
you uh may hear about
uh the pressures that different
countries are under to
deliver vaccines for their for their
public
um this is these vaccines are a
a multinational effort they're produced
as a result of
international cooperation and i want to
stress that we in the uk
uh will continue to uh to to view it in
that spirit and uh
we don't have any uh bans on on
exporting
stuff and we'll continue to cooperate
with our
with our european friends now let's go
to fergus walsh of the bbc
thank you prime minister um is there a
danger
that the unfounded concerns about the
safety
of the astrazeneca vaccine might put
some people off
from having their jab what would you say
to them
and for professor witty how important is
it that
the under 50s get immunized
as soon as possible thanks well
fergus i think the the best testimony uh
that
i can offer about the the safety of the
uh of the pfizer and the oxford
astrazeneca which seemed to be pretty
much i identical in in safety terms is
really what you've heard
uh just now from uh dr rain and
and professor witte i think that they
are uh you know
uh uh medical professionals whose view
it is that these are safe
and effective vaccines and that's been
confirmed today
uh by the european medicines agency and
i think that's a
i think a voice that will be heard
around the whole of the
of the european union and that's that's
all to the good
um i mean i just add to that uh the the
overwhelming professional view
of doctors around the world and other
health professionals
is these vaccines are highly effective
against a dangerous infection that is
common and they are safe
very safe relative to the risk of the
infection so
uh the first thing is to say there's a
very strong professional consensus on
that
and it is clear that the british public
also have taken that message and if you
look at the numbers that people have
coming forward
forward for vaccination uh well over 90
percent
in the age groups that have gone through
their vaccination have chosen to take
this up so there is
the general public is as always sensible
and steady on this they understand
this is a dangerous disease an effective
vaccine
and one that's got very low uh side
effects compared to the risk of catching
the disease
in terms of the over the under 50s we
the the biggest risk uh as everyone uh
will by now know
is in those who are older or have health
conditions so it's quite right that
those were
uh were prioritized and the jcbi
prioritization made that clear
and in terms of people who had who have
sadly died from
kovid 99 of people who died would have
come from either
people over 50 or with pre-existing
health conditions
who are in the groups that are currently
vaccinated so that was the absolute
priority
and we know that a second vaccine on top
of the first
adds to the protection so it is really
important
that uh people who are invited for a
second vaccination
uh come and get it and then in
particular these people in the in the
first
the jcbi groups one to nine the people
over 50 and with health conditions so
really important they do that
once those are vaccinated it is also
very important we start going down the
ages because people can continue to have
significant health problems uh in their
40s 30s
20s and occasionally even younger than
that but
it decreases over age but there's still
significant health problems all the way
through
so it will be critical that once we got
through the first group who are the ones
who are most at risk
we go on to do this protection and it
does one additional thing which is the
higher the proportion of the population
are vaccinated
the the smaller the risk to everybody so
by being vaccinated someone protects
themselves and if they
take the second vaccine they protect
themselves even more
but if they also have the vaccination
they reduce the risk
of passing on kobe to people around them
so that's what we really want is
everyone to be vaccinated for their own
protection
and if everybody is protected that also
protects everyone
else in society thanks folks emily
morgan
itv thank you prime minister and
you said that there's no change to the
roadmap but you have also said in the
past that we will only move to the next
phase of easing of lockdown
if we pass four tests doesn't this
vaccine supply issue mean that we are
actually going to fail the first test
which is the continued successful
deployment of the vaccine
uh no um i think the short answer to
that though
we'll be able to uh to meet our targets
in in exactly the way that uh
that i described by by april the 12th
and by
and by july and that's the that's the
crucial thing that will enable us to get
on with
uh the the steps on the timetable that
uh that we've set out so
uh april the 12th may the 17th uh
uh june 21st we will continue all the
uh the unlockings that uh that i've set
out if
if the the four tests as i've said
continue
continue to be met thank you very much
uh tom newton done
times thank you prime minister
question for uh professor witty are
vaccine centers gps whoever banned from
administering
vaccines to under 50s if they have stock
left over if they've done all their
group sixes if they've done all their
over 50s
and question to prime minister on
india's role
in stopping the syrian institute from
exporting four million doses
you just said they they're just done
what was the indian government's role in
that do you know and furthermore
if they have indeed stopped the syrian
institute from exporting four million
doses to us
is that not the same vaccine national
nationalism
that you're quick to call the eu out on
have been sun so far over india
um i mean the nhs has been
really clear that what they want to do
is to prioritize the people in the
the over 50s and those in the high-risk
groups plus health and social care
workers
uh and uh carers of vulnerable people
and they've done that for a really
obvious reason that i think everybody
accepts and what
those leading this have said and i
completely agree with this
is we must at this point really
prioritize
uh the possibility that we don't miss
anybody leave anyone behind
because we're racing down the ages and
just to give a uh
something you know the the society of
actuaries
gave some numbers on this to explain why
this is so important
and what they show what they said was
that if uh if you assume the
vaccine is completely effective which
isn't completely affected but very close
to
uh very very close to that for practical
purposes
you would need to vaccinate 20 people in
the highest
risk group to actually uh prevent one
death by the time we get down to the
ones people in their 50s who are
otherwise well don't other have other
problems
you need to vaccinate 8 000 people to
actually prevent one death the point i'm
making is
the key priority at the moment is to
find all the people who've
not yet had the opportunity to be
offered a vaccine in the highest risk
groups complete on that
and then we absolutely then want to go
down further down the ages
uh but that's that's the reason for the
decisions
yeah and tom on your question about the
serum institute of india i i want to
thank the
the serum institute of india for their
heroic role
in producing huge quantities of vaccine
and the indian government hasn't
uh stopped uh any export there is
there is a delay as as i've described as
there is
uh very frequently in vaccine rollout
programs but
this is believe me by no means the end
of the story
of uh the uk's uh relationship with
the serum institute of india and uh and
you know we hope to make
uh further progress over the over the
weeks and months ahead there is there is
a huge amount of work
that we want to do together and this is
this is just the beginning
thanks very much uh tom i think you
wanted to come back on something
do you want to come back there tom very
quickly yeah
for that delay if not a band have the
indian government delay that
no no no there there is there is a there
is
there is a delay is there as there often
is uh calls for
for various technical reasons uh uh but
uh we hoped as i've said to continue to
work
very closely with the uh serum institute
of india and indeed with partners
around the world including uh on on the
european continent so
this is a this is a big international
effort uh we're gonna continue
uh as as the uk uh to be to be
global in our outlook as as you would
expect us
uh to be um steve swinford the times
uh prime minister you've previously
called for an amnesty for migrants who
are in the uk illegally
how comfortable are you with the idea of
sending asylum seekers overseas for
processing
and professor witte the latest figures
suggest that just one in 16 000
tests on school children have come back
positive
how confident are you that we'll be able
to proceed with the easing of the
lockdown
on april 12th steve
the first uh point about uh
the illegal immigration into into the uk
uh is that and you're perfectly right i
think when when
uh people have been here for for a very
long time
uh and haven't for fallen foul of the of
the law
uh then it makes sense to try to
regularize their status but that
actually is
is pretty much what already happens
under under under the existing
rules but when it comes to uh what the
home secretary was was setting out
uh i i want to be clear the objective
here is to
is to save life and avert human
misery because people are crossing the
channel uh who
are being fooled who are being uh conned
by uh gangsters into paying huge sums of
money
uh risking their lives people have died
making this
uh trying to make this crossing and it
is a
a deeply repugnant uh traffic that we
we need to stop and that's why the home
secretary has set out the
the tough series of proposals that
you've seen but the objective
is a humanitarian and one and a humane
one
which is to to stop the uh the abuse of
these people
by uh by a bunch of traffickers and and
gangsters that's what we're
we're trying to do thanks thanks very
much i'm sorry for the schools people
sorry sorry chris
on on schools uh just three points and
the first of which is a huge thank you
to teachers and other
school staff who have done a really
terrific job in making it
as safe as possible for to all children
to come back
and remembering of course that children
are not the group who are
heavily affected by this uh by this this
infection
but they are important in potentially in
the transmission and what they're doing
uh in the schools is really going to
benefit the students
the staff and wider society in terms of
we are expecting that schools going back
will put some upward pressure on our
we've said that right from the beginning
that was an accepted thing that that is
likely to happen
but the uh the roadmap was planned with
that
possibility absolutely in mind when the
prime minister announced it
and what he also said and this is just
reiterating what he said
was he wants and ministers want to be
based on data not dates
and we have not yet got to the point we
can see the full impact of the school
schools being open again and therefore
what we will need to do
is to re-look at the data once it comes
in but it takes a while
for the data fully to reveal itself and
to be properly analyzed
in a way that the prime minister and
other ministers can make a decision so
it is important that we stick to this
data not dates approach
but there's nothing at the moment that
is uh
flashing red lights beyond what you'd
expect which is of course when there are
schools open there is slightly greater
in possibility
of transmission we'll just have to see
what the data show thanks
i shall say steve on schools i was
actually to school in my
apartment with my constituency today and
the the feeling that was
they were so glad to be to be back it
was obvious from the
all the the pupils said and i want to i
want to echo what chris said i want to
thank all the teachers
who've done an amazing amount of work
getting their their schools
ready uh all the parents who put up with
uh locked down for so long
and worked so hard and uh i think that i
think i'm right in saying
that the attendance today is actually
higher than we would normally expect it
uh to be at this time of year and uh
it was it was very very good to see the
the enthusiasm for
for being back at school and and uh the
the steps that
uh schools are still taking to um and
rightly taking to ensure that
uh it's kobe secure uh mesa hall of the
express
uh thank you prime minister uh if i
could ask uh professor whitty
have you seen any evidence uh that the
suspension of the oxford vaccine in some
european
countries has had any impact here in
terms of people
not turning up for appointments or
perhaps asking for an alternative
if they do and uh prime minister next
week is the
anniversary of the start of the first
lockdown i think you've said that you'll
privately
observe a minute silence as the married
curie charity has asked people to do
should we see it as a national day of
commemoration for those that we've
lost in this pandemic and have you given
any more thought to a permanent memorial
to them
uh on the question you asked me i mean
there are anecdotal reports which i'm
sure will be accurate that
in some places a few people have not uh
turned up immediately after they heard
the news
i suspect a lot of them will think about
it see the very reassuring data
that the mhra has given that dr rain
laid out earlier the very reassuring
points that the
world health organization made the very
reassuring things that the
european medicine agency made and the
overwhelming view of the medical and
nursing and other health professions
and they will realize that this is
something that having had a pause for
thought
they want to do but the numbers were
very small who did that actually
almost record numbers have been going
through in terms of numbers of people
taking up the vaccine
the overall there is no evidence of a
significant problem that people do not
want vaccination
and anybody who is doubtful about this i
would encourage them just to think
through
the dangers of covid how common it is
and the safety of the vaccines this is
something they
absolutely is in their interest as well
as everyone around them's interests
uh for them to take yeah and mesa on the
anniversary of course i'll be marking it
uh as i'm sure uh millions of others
will arrive around the country
uh and on the uh idea for a national
memorial
um uh yes we will certainly be pursuing
that and
a lot of good uh suggestions have
already uh already come in and you'll be
but you'll be hearing more about that in
in due course
uh let's go to alex brown of the
scotsman
good evening uh for you prime minister
when will cross-border travel
be relaxed enough for the 800 000 scots
in england to go home
and see their families again and
secondly do you think nicola sturgeon
should resign if she broke the
ministerial code
and would you expect the same with your
own ministers
uh well uh alex i i hope very much that
uh we'll be able to uh move around as
one
uh united kingdom according to the
timetable set out on the
uh on the roadmap and i hope that uh
everybody will
show common sense in application of the
rules
uh around the country and as i've said
earlier earlier on
uh there's no change to the roadmap uh
as a result of anything uh to do with
the
vaccine rollout which continues which
continues well
and i think your second question was an
attempt to
get me quite properly to get me to
comment on something which i think
uh is properly and rightly left uh
to the uh parliament in uh in scotland
to address and
and to the scottish electorate okay
everybody
thank you very much thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live
in the app and get the full story with
bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news